hi friends
In this video we are going to learn about the
graph data structures
So simply saying a graph is a collection of vertices
and edges
So this is an example for a graph and the
vertices are also called as nodes
And here we have five
vertices 0123 and four and these vertices are connected
by the edges and an edge is represented by a
pair of vertices
So if you see 01 it means the recent edge
between zero and one
So a graph can be represented like this G of
E V where E and V stands for edges and vertices
respectively
A graph is not possible without vertices so we cannot
have an empty set for V
And for E it is possible that we don't have
an edge in a graph
So an empty set for E is a lot for
a graph and we have two types of graph
first one is undirected graph So as the names such
as we have undirected edges here now say this
edge between zero and one
Since there is no direction we can say this edges
from 0 to 1 and it may also be defined
as an edge from 1 to 0
So for such graphs we always take double the number
of the edges
So here the number of edges is equal to two
and the edges are 01 and 10
Now say another undirected graph
The vertices in this graph are 0123 and four and
the number of edges is not seven but 14 and
the edges are 0102 and zero three from zero
And from one we have 1013 and one four and
2023 from two and from three we have 303132 and
three four and finally from four we have four one
and four three
So that is an undirected graph now let us see the
next type of graph which are the directive
graphs and obviously the direction of every edge will be
specified in the graph
So see this vertices zero and one and there is an
edge between them and this directed from 0 to 1
so it is always from 0 to 1 it is indicated
by 01
Now see this example of it directed graph and the
vertices in this graph are 0123 and four and the
number of edges is 7
And the edges are 0102 and 03 from zero
And from one we have edges towards three and four
So we have 13 and one four and from two
We have an edge towards three
So it is 23 and from three we have an
edge towards four
So it is three four and finally we have No
edge coming from four
So that would be all
Next will discuss about the degree of a graph and
there will be two types of degree for each node
in a graph
The in degree and the out degree first let us see
the in degree of a vertex and it is the
number of edges that are coming into that vertex
So take vertex zero here and there are no
edges that are coming into it
So in degree equal to zero now take vertex one
We have an edge from 0 to 1
So in degree equal to one
Now take vertex two and there is an edge from 0 to 2
Now take vertex three and the we have three
edges coming into it which are from 01 and two
So in degree of vertex three equal to three
And finally we have vertex four and we have
two edges to vertex four from one and three
So in degree equal to two
Now let us discuss about out degree and it is
the number of edges that are coming out of a
vertex and take vertex zero here
And we have three edges coming out of zero
So it's out degree
equal to three and take vertex one here and we
have two edges coming out of it
So out degree equal to two and take vertex two
we have one edge from two so out degree of vertex
two equal to one
And next we have vertex three and we have
just one edge from 3 to 4
So out
degree equal to one
And finally we have vertex four and we have
No edges coming out of vertex four
So out degree of vertex four equal to zero
So that is the concept of in degree and out
degree of Vertex in the graph. Thank you.